1. ABSTRACT

Diabetes is a chronic metabolic disorder that is marked by high blood glucose levels. The early diagnosis of diabetes can go a long way in lowering the risks associated with it and improving patient outcomes. The objective of this project is to analyze medical data and build a machine learning model to predict the possibility of a patient having diabetes using medical measurements. Logistic Regression was used as the main classification algorithm. The results showed that the accuracy of the model was satisfactory and that glucose levels and BMI are crucial in determining diabetes.

2. INTRODUCTION

Healthcare analytics is an important area in disease prediction and preventive medicine. With the growing availability of medical data, machine learning can help in early diagnosis.

The project aims to predict diabetes based on patient health records. By using exploratory data analysis and classification techniques, we can try to find important medical factors related to diabetes.

3. PROBLEM STATEMENT

The problem statement for this project is to develop a predictive model that will classify patients as either diabetic or non-diabetic based on medical attributes.

Target Variable:

0 → Non-Diabetic

1 → Diabetic

Objective:

Analyze dataset

Extract important health attributes

Develop classification model

Test model performance

4. DATASET DESCRIPTION

The dataset used for this project is based on the Pima Indians Diabetes Dataset found on Kaggle.

Attributes:

Pregnancies – Number of times pregnant

Glucose – Plasma glucose concentration

BloodPressure – Diastolic blood pressure (mm Hg)

SkinThickness – Triceps skin fold thickness (mm)

Insulin – 2-Hour serum insulin (mu U/ml)

BMI – Body Mass Index

DiabetesPedigreeFunction – Genetic likelihood of diabetes

Age – Age of patient

Outcome – Target variable (0 or 1)

5. TOOLS AND TECHNOLOGIES USED

Python

Jupyter Notebook

Pandas

NumPy

Matplotlib

Seaborn

Scikit-Learn
METHODOLOGY

The project will adopt the typical Machine Learning process:

Data Collection

Data Preprocessing

Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)

Feature Selection

Model Building

Model Evaluation

Interpretation of Results

7. DATA PREPROCESSING
7.1 Checking Data Shape

The data has 768 instances and 9 features.

7.2 Checking Missing Values

There were zero values in some features, which are medically implausible (e.g., Glucose = 0). These were replaced with median values.

7.3 Data Type Verification

All variables were numeric and appropriate for machine learning algorithms.

8. EXPLORATORY DATA ANALYSIS (EDA)
8.1 Outcome Distribution

About 35% of the patients were diabetic, and 65% were non-diabetic.

8.2 Glucose Analysis

Higher glucose levels were significantly present in diabetic patients.

8.3 BMI Analysis

Patients with higher BMI had higher chances of diabetes.

8.4 Age Distribution

Older patients had slightly higher chances of diabetes.

8.5 Correlation Analysis

Correlation heatmap showed that Glucose had the highest positive correlation with Outcome.

9. FEATURE SELECTION

Independent Variables (X):

Pregnancies

Glucose

BloodPressure

SkinThickness

Insulin

BMI

DiabetesPedigreeFunction

Age

Dependent Variable (y):

Outcome

10. TRAIN-TEST SPLIT

The data is split into:

80% Training Data

20% Testing Data

This is to ensure that the model is tested on unseen data.

11. MODEL BUILDING
Logistic Regression

Logistic Regression is used because:

The target variable is binary.

It is a probability-based classification.

The model gives a probability estimate through the sigmoid function.

12. MODEL EVALUATION
12.1 Accuracy

The model had an accuracy of 80-85%.

Accuracy = (Correct Predictions / Total Predictions)

12.2 Confusion Matrix

True Positive (TP)

True Negative (TN)

False Positive (FP)

False Negative (FN)

False Negatives are of utmost importance in the medical field, as patients with diseases can go undetected.

12.3 Precision

It shows the number of correctly predicted diabetic cases.

12.4 Recall

It shows the number of actual diabetic cases that were correctly predicted.

Recall is of utmost importance in medical diagnosis.

12.5 F1-Score

It is the harmonic mean of precision and recall.

13. RESULTS AND INTERPRETATION

Glucose is the most important predictor of diabetes.

BMI is a moderate predictor.

Age is a predictor but not as important as glucose.

Logistic Regression is a good predictor but can be improved.

The model can be used as a screening test but cannot be used as a substitute for medical diagnosis.

14. LIMITATIONS

The dataset is restricted to a certain population.

The model will not generalize well to the global population.

No feature scaling has been done.

The model does not incorporate advanced models.

15. FUTURE WORK

Random Forest and XGBoost models need to be implemented.

Feature engineering needs to be done.

Cross-validation needs to be implemented.

The recall value for diabetic patients needs to be improved.

16. APPLICATIONS

Hospital decision support systems

Early screening systems

Preventive healthcare programs

17. ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS

Patient privacy needs to be maintained.

The model predictions need to support, not replace, doctors.

Bias needs to be avoided in the training data.

18. CONCLUSION

This project has shown that machine learning can be used to support healthcare analytics. The model was able to classify diabetic and non-diabetic patients with a certain level of accuracy using Logistic Regression. The glucose level feature was found to be the most important feature. Such models can be used to develop early screening and preventive healthcare programs with further improvements and validation.

19. REFERENCES

Kaggle Diabetes Dataset

Scikit-Learn Documentation

Healthcare Analytics Research Papers

20. APPENDIX
Sample Code Snippet
from sklearn.linear_model import LogisticRegression
model = LogisticRegression()
model.fit(X_train, y_train)
y_pred = model.predict(X_test)
________________________________________
END OF REPORT

